Exercises

1. List the commands for adding, updating, and deleting data.

   A: The commands for adding or deleting data are 'INSERT INTO',
      'UPDATE', 'DELETE', and if the table already exists 
      'ALTER TABLE' can be used to add, update, or delete columns. 'DROP
      TABLE' can be used to delete an existing table from a database.

2. Explain the structure for each type of command.

   A: The structures for each type of command:

      INSERT INTO

      INSERT INTO table_name (name1, name2,...)
      VALUES
      (value1, value2, ...),
      (value12, value22, ...),
      (value13, value23, ...),
      (value14, value24, ...);

      The 'INSERT INTO' statement fills a table with values.
      Every 'name' in the parentheses is the set of columns that the 
      values are connected to. This 'INSERT INTO' statement would 
      create a table where based of the number of names in parentheses,
      we would have that many columns and the grouped values within 
      parentheses would indicate that many rows. 

      UPDATE

      UPDATE table_name SET name(s)=value(s)  WHERE another_name(s)=another_value(s);

      The 'UPDATE' statement takes in one or more clauses between 
      'SET' and 'WHERE' and update the value(s) indicated by what is right
      of the 'WHERE'. There can be multiple statements put to the right of
      the 'WHERE' statement as well.

      DELETE

      DELETE FROM table_name WHERE name(s)=value(s);

      The 'DELETE' statement takes in the table name after 'FROM' and 
      deletes the row(s) indicated by the name(s) and value(s) after the
      'WHERE'. Multiple 'WHERE' clauses can be used.

      ALTER TABLE

      ALTER TABLE table_name ADD COLUMN new_column_name data_type;

      or 
   
      ALTER TABLE table_name ADD COLUMN new_column_name data_type SET DEFAULT value;

      The 'ALTER TABLE' statement takes in the name of the table to be altered.
      After the 'ADD COLUMN' the new column name is entered along with the data type
      each value should be (like text or decimal for examples). After the
      'SET DEFAULT' a default value can be added into each column entry.

      ALTER TABLE table_name DROP COLUMN column_name;

      Here the 'ALTER TABLE' statement takes in the name of the table to be altered.
      The column that is specified is "dropped" or deleted from the table.

      DROP TABLE

      DROP TABLE table_name;

      The 'DROP TABLE' statement deletes the table with the corresponding
      table name.

3. What are some of the data types that can be used in tables?
   Give a real-world example of each type.

   A: There are forty data types that can be used in tables.
      Here I will indicated four types. I will explain the type and explicate 
      a real-world example of each type I indicate. A "boolean" value is 
      one data type that can exist in a table. It's only entries are 'true'
      and 'false'. An example of this is a database at a shipping firm that 
      indicates whether a particular item has been shipped. If the item is 
      shipped the value would be 'true' and if the item has not been shipped
      the value would be 'false'. Next value to discuss would be "date". This 
      is a calendar date with the format year/month/day. An example of this 
      can be again be at the shipping firm mentioned in the last example. If 
      an item has been shipped the date it was shipped can be indicated 
      otherwise a default value can be assigned. Another type is "integer" which
      which can have a positive or negative value and is a whole number.
      A real world example of this can be how many of a particular type of 
      pastry a bakery has made on a particular day. Usually when pastries are
      baked they are not produced in any amounts other than integers. For instance,
      'five dozen croissants' and 'A gross of apple turnovers' are very likely to 
      be hear in a bakery. The last data type I will disscuss is "text". This 
      data type is a character string that can be of varying length. A real-world
      example of a string entry would be the name of each worker at a company in 
      a database that monitors attendance. The name of each worker would be in the 
      database as a character string.
      

4. Decide how to create a new table to hold a list of people
   invited to a wedding dinner. The table needs to have 
   first and last names, whether they sent in their RSVP, the 
   number of guests they are bringing, and the number of meals 
   (1 for adults and 1/2 for children).

   * Which data type would you use to store each of the 
     following pieces of information?
     * First and last name.
     * Whether they sent in their RSVP.
     * Number of guests.
     * Number of meals.
   * Write a command that creates the table to track the 
     wedding dinner.
   * Write a command that adds a column to track whether 
     the guest sent a thank you card.
   * You have decided to move the data about the meals to another
     table, so write a command to remove the column storing the 
     number meals from the wedding table. 
   * The guests will need a place to sit at the reception, so 
     write a command that adds a column for table number.
   * The wedding is over and we do not need to keep this 
     information, so write a command that deletes the table 
     numbers from the database.

   A: I will answer each bullet point in order.

      * Which data type would you use to store each of the 
        following pieces of information?
        * First and last name.
        * Whether they sent in their RSVP.
        * Number of guests.
        * Number of meals.

        * First name and last name would be stored as "text".
        * Whether they sent in their RSVP I would store as "boolean".
        * Number of guests I would store as "integer".
        * Number of meals I would store as "numeric".

      * Write a command that creates the table to track the 
        wedding dinner.

        CREATE TABLE invited (
            FirstName text,
            LastName text,
            RSVP boolean,
            Guests integer,
            Meals numeric(5, 1)
        ); 

      * Write a command that adds a column to track whether 
        the guest sent a thank you card.

        ALTER TABLE invited ADD COLUMN ThankYouCard boolean;

      * You have decided to move the data about the meals to another
        table, so write a command to remove the column storing the 
        number meals from the wedding table. 

        ALTER TABLE invited DROP COLUMN Meals;

      * The guests will need a place to sit at the reception, so 
        write a command that adds a column for table number.

        ALTER TABLE invited ADD COLUMN TableNumber integer;

      * The wedding is over and we do not need to keep this 
        information, so write a command that deletes the table 
        numbers from the database.

        ALTER TABLE invited DROP COLUMN TableNumber;

5. Write a command to create a new table to hold the books in a 
   library with the columns ISBN, title, author, genre, publishing 
   date, number of copies, and available copies.

   * Find three books and add their information to the table.
   * Someone has just checked out one of the books. Change the number
     of available copies to 1 fewer.
   * Now one of the books has been added to the banned books list. 
     Remove it from the table.

   A: I will answer each bullet point in order after creating the table.

      CREATE TABLE books (
          ISBN integer,
          Title text,
          Author text,
          Genre text,
          PublishingDate date,
          NumberOfCopies integer,
          AvailableCopies integer
      );

      * Find three books and add their information to the table.
        
        INSERT INTO books (ISBN, Title, Author, Genre, PublishingDate, NumberOfCopies, AvailableCopies)
        VALUES
        (9787543321724, 'The Catcher in the Rye', 'J.D. Salinger', 'coming-of-age' , 1951-07-16, 3, 3),
        (9780679722649, 'The Maltese Falcon', 'Dashiell Hammett', 'mystery', 1930-09-23, 2, 2),
        (9780441790340, 'Stranger in a Strange Land', 'Robert A. Heinlein', 'science-fiction', 1961-06-01, 4, 4);

      * Someone has just checked out one of the books. Change the number
        of available copies to 1 fewer.

        UPDATE books SET AvailableCopies=3  WHERE ISBN=9780441790340;

      * Now one of the books has been added to the banned books list. 
        Remove it from the table.

        DELETE FROM books WHERE ISBN=9787543321724;

6. Write a command to make a new table to hold spacecrafts. Information
   should include id, name, year launched, country of origin, a brief
   description of the mission, orbiting body, if it is currently 
   operating, and its approximate miles from Earth. In addition to the 
   table creation, provide commands that perform the following 
   operations:

   * Add three non-Earth-orbiting satellites to the table.
   * Remove one of the satellites from the table since it has just 
     crashed into the planet.
   * Edit another satellite because it is no longer operating and 
     change the value to reflect that.

   A: I will answer each bullet point in order after creating the table.

      CREATE TABLE spacecrafts (
          ID integer,
          Name text,
          LaunchYear integer,
          Country text,
          Description text,
          OrbitingBody text,
          Operating boolean,
          MilesFromEarth integer
      );

      * Add three non-Earth-orbiting satellites to the table.

        INSERT INTO spacecrafts (ID, Name, LaunchYear, Country, Description, OrbitingBody, Operating, MilesFromEarth)
        VALUES
        (8975, 'Sand Rover', 2008, 'Russia' , 'particle collection', 'Mars', true, 358000000),
        (1234, 'Snap Ship', 2011, 'USA', 'take surface pictures', 'Saturn', true, 746000000),
        (6730, 'The Humble Scope', 2013, 'Brazil', 'examine Venus surface', 'Venus', true,  25000000);

      * Remove one of the satellites from the table since it has just 
        crashed into the planet.

        DELETE FROM spacecrafts WHERE ID=6730;

      * Edit another satellite because it is no longer operating and 
        change the value to reflect that.

        UPDATE spacecrafts SET Operate=false WHERE ID=8975;

7. Write a command to create a new table to hold the emails in your inbox.
   This table should include an id, the subject line, the sender, any 
   additional recipients, the body of the email, the timestamp, whether or
   not you have read the email, and the id of the email chain it's in. 
   Also provide commands that perform the following operations:

   * Add three new emails to the inbox.
   * You deleted one of the emails, so write a command to remove the row 
     from the inbox table.
   * You started reading an email but just heard a crash in another room. 
     Mark the email as unread before investigating the crash, so you can 
     come back and read it later.

   A: I will answer each bullet point in order after creating the table.

      CREATE TABLE emails (
          ID integer,
          SubjectLine text,
          Sender text,
          AdditionalRecipients text,
          Body text,
          TimeStamp timestamp,
          Read boolean,
          EmailChainID integer
      );

      * Add three new emails to the inbox.

        INSERT INTO emails (ID, SubjectLine, Sender, AdditionalRecipients, Body, TimeStamp, Read, EmailChainID)
        VALUES
        (1122, 'Hello', 'jane.doe@gmail.com', 'none' , 'blah blah blah', 2008-11-11 13:23:44, true, 42),
        (1123, 'How are you', 'my.name@hotmail.com', 'none', 'you get the idea', 2008-11-12 15:45:21, true, 43),
        (1124, 'It is me', 'john.doe.jersey@yahoo.com', 'none', 'at least I hope so', 2008-11-13 17:56:59, true,  44);

      * You deleted one of the emails, so write a command to remove the row 
        from the inbox table.

        DELETE FROM emails WHERE ID=1122;

      * You started reading an email but just heard a crash in another room. 
        Mark the email as unread before investigating the crash, so you can 
        come back and read it later.

        UPDATE emails SET Read=false WHERE ID=1124;


